Create an ETD Using Adobe Acrobat     
Lesson 2: Create a PDF File

Create a PDF File

Now that you’ve seen what an ETD looks like and how to browse the contents, it’s 
time to learn how to convert your own thesis or dissertation into a PDF ﬁle. There 
are several different options for doing this, and all require that you have a copy 
of Adobe® Acrobat® Standard or Professional installed on your computer. Adobe 
Reader, which is freely available for downloading from many Internet sites, can only 
be used to read a PDF ﬁle. You cannot use it to create a PDF ﬁle. 

 
Tip
Exercise 1 and 
Exercise 2 produce  
the same result. 
Choose the one that 
works best for you.

In this lesson, you will learn how to: 

1.  Create a PDF using PDFMaker from within Microsoft® Word

2.  Create a PDF using the Print command

3.  Combine multiple ﬁles

1

Create an ETD Using Adobe Acrobat     
Lesson 2: Create a PDF File

Exercise 1 – Create a PDF Using PDFMaker

In this exercise, you will learn how to use PDFMaker to convert a  
Microsoft Word document to a PDF ﬁle.
 

1.  Start Microsoft Word and open your thesis or dissertation.

View Demo 

2.  Look at the toolbars at the top of the window. Notice there are two areas 

 

related to Acrobat PDFMaker: 
 
 

• The Adobe PDF and Acrobat Comment menus 
• The Acrobat icons 

 

 

3.  Click the Adobe PDF menu and choose Change Conversion Settings.

4.  The Adobe PDFMaker dialog box opens. It contains four tabs with a 

number of different options. 

5.  To create an ETD, choose Standard from the Conversion Settings  

pop-up menu on the Settings tab. 

6.  The View Adobe PDF results option should also be checked to ensure 

that the converted ﬁle will display automatically. Next, look under the  
Application Settings heading and verify that the Add Links To Adobe 
PDF option is checked so that any hyperlinks in your document will be 
automatically converted to Acrobat links. 

 
Tip
The Acrobat 7 installer 
scans your system for 
a copy of Microsoft 
Ofﬁce 98 or later, and 
if found, automatically 
loads PDFMaker. This 
is the macro that 
allows you to create 
PDFs from Word as 
well as Excel and 
PowerPoint. 

If you do not see 
Acrobat PDFMaker in  
Microsoft Word, go 
to Exercise 2 to use 
the Print command to 
create a PDF ﬁle.  

 
Tip
The default settings 
will create an ETD. 
Click the Restore 
Defaults button to 
make sure that the 
defaults are selected 
or click the Advanced 
Settings button and 
click the appropriate 
tabs to make sure 
fonts are embedded or 
to change image or  
color settings.

2

Create an ETD Using Adobe Acrobat     
Lesson 2: Create a PDF File

7.  Click OK to save your settings. 

8.  You are ready to convert your thesis or dissertation to an Acrobat PDF 

ﬁle. Click the Adobe PDF menu and choose Convert To Adobe PDF, or,  
alternatively, click the        Convert To Adobe PDF button. 

9.  When prompted, type a ﬁle name (or accept the default name suggested 

by Microsoft Word), and click Save. 

10.  When the conversion is complete, your document will automatically open 

in Acrobat, and you can check to see how it looks.

Continue to Exercise 2

3

Create an ETD Using Adobe Acrobat     
Lesson 2: Create a PDF File

Exercise 2 – Create a PDF Using the Print Command

In this exercise, you will learn how to use the Print command to convert  
a Microsoft Word document to a PDF ﬁle. If you use a different word  
processor, you should easily be able to duplicate the steps described below.  
Your application must simply be capable of producing printed output.

View Demo

1.  Start Microsoft Word and open your thesis or dissertation.
 
2.  Choose Print from the File menu.

3.  The Print dialog box opens. Choose Adobe PDF from the pop-up menu 

under Printer.

4.  To set your print options, click the Properties button.

5.  Click the Adobe PDF Settings tab. Notice that it contains a number of 

different settings.

6.  For an ETD, choose Standard from the Default Settings menu.

7.  Verify that the View Adobe PDF results option is checked so that the 

converted ﬁle will display automatically.

4

Create an ETD Using Adobe Acrobat     
Lesson 2: Create a PDF File

8.  Click OK in the Document Properties dialog box to save your settings. 

9.  To continue to convert your dissertation or thesis to an Acrobat PDF ﬁle, 

click OK in the Print dialog box.

10.  When prompted, type a ﬁle name (or accept the default name suggested 

by Word). Note that the default ﬁle extension is .pdf. Click Save.

11.  When the conversion is complete, your document will automatically open 

in Acrobat, and you can check to see how it looks.

 
Continue to Exercise 3

5

Create an ETD Using Adobe Acrobat     
Lesson 2: Create a PDF File

Exercise 3 – Combine Multiple Files 

In this exercise you will see how to combine two or more PDF ﬁles  
into a single document. By using a single command you can quickly  
combine multiple ﬁles.

View Demo

1.  Using the instructions in Exercise 1 or 2, convert all the documents  

you want to merge to PDF ﬁles.

2.  Start Adobe Acrobat.

3.  From the File menu, choose Create PDF, then choose From  

Multiple Files.

4.  A new dialog box opens so that you can add the ﬁles you want to 

combine. Click the Browse button, navigate to each ﬁle, and click  
the Add button to select it.

5.  When you have listed all the ﬁles to be included, use the Move Up and 
Move Down buttons to rearrange the order of the ﬁles or the Remove 
button to delete a particular ﬁle. 

6.  To merge the selected documents, click OK.

6

