Charles Darwin
, for all he contributed to the science of biology, never knew about the
mechanism by which living things inherit traits from previous generations, or how new traits
arise. 
As any schoolchild can tell you, this mechanism of interitance has since been found to be
DNA2
, or deoxyribonucleic acid. DNA allows for stable inheritance of traits: the code in
each strand of DNA is replicated precisely through the pairing of basic units along each
strand. The error rate in this replication is amazingly low; not even one base pair in a
million matches out of sequence. 
However, when even one base pair is added to a new strain of DNA in an order differently
than in the parent chain, it can be the basis of a mutation. These changes in DNA sequences
are the microscopic origin of changes in traits of all studied living things. Even the smallest
difference in a strand of DNA can result in a change in traits that can cost the life of the
organism. Mutations can produce proteins with a new or altered function. In humans, the
example of Sickle cell anemia is commonly given as its origin is a difference of only one
base pair in a section of DNA that encodes red blood cells. 
Individual sequences of DNA that encode for specific proteins are called genes and are the
units of heredity. Each one has a set nucleotide, and together all of the genes (and some
sequence of DNA that apparently do not code for any biologically important functions)
together make up the entire chromosome5

DNA stands for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid. That is, a nucleic acid with two sugars. DNA is
the hereditary material of cells and is considered the blueprint of life. DNA is found in all
kingdoms of life. Even most viruses have DNA. A molecule of DNA is chemically stable (it
does not have a 2-prime alcohol group. )
When someone says DNA, they may be referring to one's genetic material on multiple levels:
They may be speaking about a single deoxyribose nucleic acid molecule, a section of a double
helix, a section of a chromosome, or one's entire hereditary composition. 

A mutation is a permanent change to an organism's genetic material (DNA1 or RNA). 
Mutations are a rare but significant biological process, since they provide the variation on
which evolution acts and are also the source of cancer. 
An organism's genetic material is made up of polymers (chains) of four different nucleotides,
like a recipe book written in a language of only four letters. A mutation event is when the
order of the nucleotides in DNA change, usually when the DNA is being copied. 

Under the three domains are six kingdoms in taxonomy. The first two, Plants and Animals,
are commonly understood and will not be expounded here. 
Protista, the third kingdom, was introduced by the German biologist Ernst Haeckel in
1866 to classify micro-organisms which are neither animals nor plants. Since protists are
quite irregular, this kingdom is the least understood and the genetic similarities between
organisms in this kingdom are largely unknown. For example, some protists can exhibit
properties of both animals and plants. 
Fungi are organisms which obtain food by absorbing materials in their bodies. Mushrooms
and moulds belong in this kingdom. Originally, they were part of the plant kingdom but
were recategorised when they were discovered not to photosynthesise. 
Eubacteria are bacteria, made up of small cells, which differ in appearance from the
organisms in the above kingdoms. They lack a nucleus and cell organelles. They have cell
walls made of peptidoglycan. 
Archae are bacteria which live in extreme environments, such as
salt lakes or hot, acidic springs. These bacteria are in their own category as detailed studies
have shown that they have unique properties and features (ex. unusual lipids that are not
found in any other organism)which differ them from other. 

Modern taxonomy is based on many hypotheses' of the evolutionary history of organisms,
known as phylogeny. As with the Scientific Method, scientists develop a hypothesis on the
history of an animal and utilise modern science and technology to prove the phylogeny. 
Cladistics is a classification system which is based on phylogeny. Expanding on phylogeny,
cladistics is based on the assumption that each group of related species has one common
ancestor and would therefore retain some ancestral characteristics. Moreover, as these
related species evolve and diverge from their common ancestor, they would develop unique
characteristics. Such characteristics are known as derived characteristics
The principles of phylogeny and cladistics can be expressed visually as a cladogram,
a branching diagram which acts as a family (phylogenetic) tree for similar species. A
cladogram can also be used to test alternative hypotheses for an animal's phylogeny. In
order to determine the most likely cladogram, the derived characteristics of similar species
are matched and analysed. 

Viruses are the smallest biological particle (the tiniest are only 20 nm in diameter). However,
they are not biological organisms so they are not classified in any kingdom of living things. 
They do not have any organelles and cannot respire or perform metabolic functions. Viruses
are merely strands of DNA or RNA surrounded by a protective protein coat called a capsid. 
Viruses only come to life when they have invaded a cell. Outside of a host cell, viruses are
completely inert. 
Since first being identified in 1935, viruses have been classified into more than 160 major
groups. Viruses are classified based on their shape, replication properties, and the diseases
that they cause. Furthermore, the shape of a virus is determined by the type and arrangement
of proteins in its capsid. Viruses pathogenic to humans are currently classified into 21 groups. 
Viruses can also attack bacteria and infect bacterial cells. Such viruses are called bacteriophages. 

The genome of a virus consists of DNA or RNA, whose size and configuration vary. The
entire genome can exist as a single nucleic acid molecule or several nucleic acid segments. 
Also, the DNA or RNA may be single-stranded or double-stranded, and either linear or
circular. 
Not all viruses can reproduce in a host cell by themselves. Since viruses are so small, the
size of their genome is limiting. For example, some viruses have coded instructions for only
making a few different proteins for the viruses' capsid. On the other hand, the human
genome codes for over 30,000 different proteins. Therefore, the lack of coded instructions
cause some viruses to need the presence of other viruses to help them reproduce themselves. 
Such viruses are called replication defective. 
Lastly, it is worthy to note that 70% of all viruses are RNA viruses. As the process of RNA
replication (with enzymes and other organelles of the host cell) is more prone to errors, RNA
viruses have much higher mutation rates than do DNA viruses. 

Algae are much simpler than protozoa. They are aquatic and contain chlorophyll. Algae can
exist as a single cell or as giant seaweeds 60 m in length. Formerly, algae were classified as
plants but this was incorrect as algae lack parts of true plants: leaves, stems, roots, xylem,
and phloem. Since algae belong in the kingdom Protista, algae is a broad term used to
denote all aquatic eukaryotes which photosynthesise; algae can differ in size and shape as
well. 
There are six phyla of algae:chlorophytes (green algae), phaeophytes (brown algae),
rhodophytes (red algae), chrysophytes (diatoms), pyrrophytes (dinoflagellates),
and euglenophytes (euglenoids). 

Chlorophytes resemble plants the most. Like plants, their cell walls contain cellulose and
they store food in reserve as starch. Chlorophytes can be unicellular or multicellular. Most
chlorophytes use flagellae for some locomotion. 

Phaeophytes are nearly all multicellular marine organisms, which are known to us as seaweeds. 
They have cell walls composed of cellulose and alginic acid (a substance similar to pectin). 
The cellulose and alignic acid help to retain water and prevent seawood from drying out
when exposed to air at low tide. 
Since phaeophytes live in a tidal environment, they have large, flat fronds (a large leaf)
which can withstand pounding by waves. Their bases strongly anchor the algae to the rocky
seabed and prevent them from being washed out to sea. Phaeophytes are usually found in
areas of cold water. 

Rhodophytes are typically found in warmer seawater, and are more delicate and smaller
than brown algae (phaeophytes). Rhodophytes are also able to grow at deeper depths in
the ocean, since red algae absorb green, violet, and blue light, the wavelengths of which
penetrate the deepest below the water surface. They also have mucilaginous material to
resist drying. 

Chryosophytes are the most abundant unicellular algae in the oceans. They are also one
of the biggest components of plankton, a free-floating collection of microorganisms, eggs,
and larvae. As photosynthetic organisms, they produce a significant amount of atmospheric
oxygen. 
The reproduction cycle of chryosophytes is particularly interesting. Note that diatoms
reproduce both asexually and sexually. Since diatoms have a rigid cell wall with an outer
layer of silica (found in sand and glass), the daughter cells produced by mitosis must fit
inside the original cell wall. Therefore, each generation of diatoms is smaller than the one
before. The reduction in size continues until the diatoms produce sexually, producing a
zygote which eventually grows to the original size as it matures. 

Pyrrophytes are unicellular, photosynthetic, and mostly aquatic. They have protective coats
composed of stiff cellulose. They are more easily identifiable, due to the presence of two
flagellae. The longer flagellae propels the dinoflagellate, while the second shorter, flatter
flagellae functions as a rudder. 
Some species of pyrrophytes are zooxanthellae. Since they lack cellulose plates, they make
their home in coral reefs and animals, such as sea anemones, and molluscs. In returning
the favour of sheltering them, dinoflagellates provide carbohydrates to their host through
photosynthesis. This is why there are nutrient-rich coral reefs in malnutritions water. 
A negative aspect of pyrrophytes is that under certain conditions, species of dinoflagellates
reproduce rapidly to form a harmful algal bloom (HAB), known as a red tide if dinoflagellates
are the cause. Such pyrrophytes can produce toxins which may injure or kill wildlife,
and additionally any consumers of contaminated wildlife. 

Digestive tract: tube extending from lips of mouth to anus or cloacae in bird, reptile or
monotreme. 
Lumanal glands: empty into inner body cavity (lumen: inner surface). 
Tract divided into three main regions: 1. buccal cavity 2. pharynx 3. alimentary canal
Alimentary canal divided into four regions: 1. esophagus 2. stomach 3. small intestine 4. 
large intestine
Accessory digestive glands, outside digestive tract proper, secrete into lumen of tract
through ducts. Includes the salivary glands, liver and pancreas. 
Buccal cavity, which includes palate and tongue, develops from infolding of stomadeum,
or second opening of blastula, whereas the rest of the digestive tract develops from the
primitive gut. 
Teeth: capture and hold prey. In mammals in particular further process and break down
food into small particles, increasing surface area available for enzymatic action. 
Tooth anatomy: 1. crown projects above gum, 2. root below gum, 3. enamel is outer
coating of crown, hardest surface in body, of epideral origin 4. dentin, below enamel,
bone-like and forms bulk of tooth, is harder than bone and contains nerves and blood vessels. 
(Remember that mammals are heterodontic, with different types of teeth). 
Pharynx: air passage for adult, gill slits in embryo. Important in lower vertebrates, site of
gills. Features derived from pharyngeal region: first pharyngeal pouch gives rise to parts
of the ear, other pouches give rise to various other structures. 
Alimentary canal: epithelium lines lumen, glands secrete into lumen, longitudinal and
circular muscles help digestive movements (peristalsis). 
Esophagus: tube carries food from mouth to stomach. Expands to fit large bolus (lump
of chewed food). Secretes mucus for lubrication. Birds have crop for storage, enlargement
of esophagus. 
Epiglottis: keeps food out of air tube, an evolutionary “kludge,” or fix. 
Stomach. Absorbs water, alcohol, nutrients, uses gastric juice with enzymes, mucous, HCl,
released by chief and parietal cells (release protein enzymes) in gastric pits. Rugae: folds
of stomach, disappear when full. Sphincter at both ends of stomach, control food passage. 
Chyme: semi-digested food released to small intestine. 